
*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74500 ***





[Illustration:

CHAMBERS’S JOURNAL

OF

POPULAR

LITERATURE, SCIENCE, AND ART

Fifth Series

ESTABLISHED BY WILLIAM AND ROBERT CHAMBERS, 1832

CONDUCTED BY R. CHAMBERS (SECUNDUS)

NO. 144.—VOL. III.      SATURDAY, OCTOBER 2, 1886.      PRICE 1½_d._]




TRUTH IN THE MARVELLOUS.


Antiquarian research, conducted in the prosaic spirit of the present
day, has dealt cruel blows at many time-honoured traditions. We are
taught that the story of the siege of Troy was a mere romance—that
Troy itself never existed; that Arthur’s Round Table was a myth; that
the accidental appearance of a Countess’s garter at a ball was not
responsible for the institution of the highest order of knighthood;
that a certain other Countess never freed the citizens of Coventry by
riding through their streets with innocence for her only dress; that
the Maid of Orleans was never burned, but married, and lived happy ever
afterwards. We hardly know what historic relation we are to be allowed
to believe. While, however, historical inquiry has discredited many
pleasant stories, hard science has come to the aid of romance, and
has testified to the veracity of some narrators who have been accused
of imposing on the credulity of the ignorant and superstitious by the
relation of wonders unworthy of credence in enlightened times. The
stories of the appearance in the heavens of blazing sceptres, fiery
serpents, and swords of fire dipped in blood, when read in the light of
the calm and unbiased observations of some meteors in recent times, are
descriptions of physical phenomena sufficiently rare to be accounted
supernatural by nations whose acquaintance with the heavenly bodies
did not extend beyond the regular movements of the sun, moon, and
planets. There is no doubt that the authors of these accounts related
truthfully what they saw, employing the language which best conveyed
their impressions.

With what awe the visit of a meteorite may be regarded, even in this
nineteenth century, by unlearned country-folk, may be gathered from the
account of one which fell at Juvenas, in Ardèche, on the 15th of June
1821, and which formed the subject of a curious _procès verbal_ drawn
up by the mayor of the commune. It was first seen at three P.M. as a
fireball, in a clear sky, while the sun was shining brightly; and it
sunk five feet into the ground. The inhabitants were so alarmed, that
it was more than a week before they could make up their minds to search
for this strange visitant. ‘They deliberated for a long time whether
they should go armed to undertake this operation, which appeared so
dangerous; but Claude Serre, the sexton, justly observed that if it was
the Evil One, neither powder nor arms would prevail against him—that
holy-water would be more effectual; and that he would undertake to make
the evil spirit fly;’ after which reassuring speech, they set to work
and dug up the aërolite, which weighed over two hundred pounds.

We read in the classic poets that on certain momentous occasions,
statues have been so affected as to perspire, as if they were living
human beings. These stories have been passed over as mere poetic
fictions; but probably they rest on a substantial foundation. The
phenomenon is doubtless that which is observed when a fire has been
lighted for the first time in a room which has for a lengthened
period been allowed to remain cold: the walls and other objects are
seen to run down with moisture, which appears as if exuded from their
surface. The same thing occurs when a long-continued frost is succeeded
by mild weather. The appearance is familiar enough to us, who are
accustomed to sudden variations of temperature; but in warmer and more
equable climates, the requisite conditions are probably rare; and the
appearance of copious moisture on statues composed of substances on
which dew is not commonly found, may well have been accounted a prodigy.

We may not be disposed to admit that the fiery cross seen by
Constantine was a miraculous intimation; but we cannot set aside the
account as necessarily apocryphal; for a celestial cross was seen
in Migné, near Poitiers, in December 1826. It was observed during a
religious service, and the preacher in his sermon had referred to the
cross of Constantine. The awe-struck congregation, on perceiving
the visible cross in the sky, of shining silver, edged with red,
immediately fell upon their knees, accepting the sign as a divine
testimony to the truth of what had just been told them. The source of
the phenomenon was afterwards found in a wooden cross which had been
erected near the chapel, the shadow of which had been cast by the
declining sun on a rising mist.

The Flying Dutchman was obviously another instance of atmospheric
reflection, and similar phantom ships have been described by modern
travellers. The Enchanted Island, or Isle of Ghosts, which had its
place in old charts in the mid-Atlantic, and so perplexed the mariners
of the middle ages by its varying appearance, defying all attempts to
reach its shores, has since been recognised as a fogbank.

Among the wonders recorded in the reign of William Rufus, it is said
that on a night in 1095, the stars seemed falling like a shower of rain
from heaven to earth, or, according to the Chronicle of Reims, were
driven like dust before the wind. A tradition is recorded as prevailing
in Thessaly that on a certain night in August the heavens were opened
and burning torches were seen through the aperture. These are clearly
but highly coloured accounts, by persons of limited knowledge of
natural phenomena, of specially brilliant displays of shooting-stars.
The last corresponds with the August meteors.

Bartholin, in his _History of Anatomy_, speaks of a patrician lady of
Verona, Catherine, wife of J. Franciscus Rambaldus, whose skin sparkled
with fire when slightly touched. ‘This noble lady,’ he says, ‘the
Creator endued with so stupendous a dignity and prerogative of nature,
that as oft as her body was but lightly touched with linen, sparks flew
out plentifully from her limbs, apparent to her domestic servants, as
if they had been struck out of a flint, accompanied also with a noise
that was to be heard by all. Oftentimes, when she rubbed her hands
upon the sleeve of her smock that contained the sparks within it, she
observed a flame with a tailed ray running about, as fired exhalations
are wont to do.... This fire was not to be seen but in the dark or in
the night, nor did it burn without itself, though combustible matter
was applied to it.’ This description of electric sparks is such as
would be given by a person who saw the phenomenon for the first time
and was ignorant of its cause. The same appearance is sometimes seen
by persons of the present generation when divesting themselves of
tight-fitting underclothing, and especially when combing their hair
with a vulcanite comb; but probably it shows itself only with persons
of peculiar constitution.

It is hardly necessary to advert to the part which comets have played
in the annals of supernatural manifestations. In classic times, however
low the state of knowledge may have been in other departments of
physical science, the celestial bodies were never without intelligent
observers, and the ancient astronomers no doubt acknowledged comets
as having their place in the planetary or sidereal economy. But this
knowledge was confined to the learned; to the common people, comets
were chariots of fire conveying departed heroes to the abode of
demigods. A splendid comet luckily appeared after the death of Julius
Cæsar, and confirmed his title to divine honours. In the dark ages,
comets were celestial portents, presages of revolution or pestilence.
Throughout the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, it was accounted
profane scepticism to attribute their appearance to natural causes;
and even as late as the beginning of the eighteenth century, we find
an intelligent writer on the natural curiosities of the world adopting
the view that these bodies are not allowed to appear except with the
special permission of Divine providence, for a specific purpose,
in opposition to the theories of astronomers, who are twitted with
assigning long periods to the orbits of comets in order that the
predictions of their reappearance may not be falsified in the lifetime
of the persons making them.

Whether it was owing to the improved means of spreading intelligence
afforded by the invention of printing, or to the excitement of men’s
minds consequent upon the political and social events of the time,
the sixteenth century was prolific in stories of wonderful sights in
the heavens and on the earth. Of the many marvellous accounts then
circulated, we select the following, which forms the subject of a tract
by Abraham Fleming, and purports to have been taken from the evidence
of eye-witnesses. The account is titled, ‘A Straunge and Terrible
Wunder wrought very late in the Parish Church of Bungay—namely, the
fourth of this August in the yeere of Our Lord 1577 ... with the
appearance of an horrible shaped thing sensibly perceived of the people
then and there assembled.’ The account is couched in terms appropriate
to the solemnity of a special manifestation from the spiritual
world, and is interspersed with ejaculations expressive of the awe
which filled the people’s minds at their witnessing the occurrences
described; but the incidents, briefly told, are as follows: A storm of
extraordinary fury was raging while the congregation were assembled at
divine service; rain came down like a deluge, lightning flashed, and
thunder pealed, so that not only dumb creatures were disquieted, but
‘senseless things void of all life and feeling shook and trembled;’
in other words, the fabric and furniture of the building were shaken
by the violence of the storm. While the tempest was at its height, a
visitor from the lower regions (as the narrator evidently believed)
made his appearance in the midst of the congregation, in the form,
‘as they might discerne it,’ of a dog, of a black colour; ‘the sight
whereof, together with the fearful flashes of fire which then were
seene, moved such admiration in the mindes of the assemblie that
they thought doome’s day was already come.’ The ‘Evil One in such a
likenesse’ ran with extraordinary speed down the body of the church
among the people. Passing between two persons who were on their knees
apparently engaged in prayer, he wrung the necks of both of them
in an instant, so that they died where they knelt. As he passed by
another man he ‘gave him such a gripe on the back that therewithal
he was presently drawen togither and shrunk up as it were a piece of
lether scorched in a hot fire; or as the mouth of a purse or bag drawn
togither with a string.’ This man, however, did not die. Meanwhile,
the parish clerk, who was cleaning out the gutter of the church, also
saw the ‘horrible shaped thing,’ and was struck to the ground with
a violent clap of thunder, but beyond his fall, was not harmed. The
stones of the church and the church door, on being afterwards examined,
bore evidence of the power of the demon in the marks of his claws or
talons; and all the wires, the wheels, and other things belonging to
the clock, were wrung in sunder and broken in pieces.

A similar occurrence is stated to have been witnessed the same day at
Blibery, a village seven miles from Bungay. In this case, the demon
planted himself upon the rood-loft, from which he flung himself down
into the church, and after killing two men and a lad, and burning the
hand of another person, flew out of the church ‘in a hideous likeness.’

Before dismissing this story as a fable, bred of the imagination of
people terror-stricken by the storm, let us compare it with the account
of an occurrence which took place on Malvern Hills on the 1st of July
1826. A party had taken refuge in an iron-roofed hut from an impending
storm, and were about to partake of refreshment when the storm came on.
A gentleman who was standing at the eastern entrance—the storm had come
from the west—saw what seemed to him to be a ball of fire moving along
the surface of the ground. It came up and entered the hut, forcing him,
as it did so, several paces forward from the doorway. An explosion
followed, described by the inhabitants of the village at the foot of
the hill (Great Malvern) as terrific. On going in, as soon as he had
recovered from the shock, to look after his sisters, he found them on
the floor, fainting, as he thought, from terror. Two of them had died
instantly; and a third lady, with others of the party, were injured.
An examination of the hut showed a large crack in the side opposite to
that at which the fireball had entered, leading up to a window, and the
iron roof above this was indented.

The correspondence of the leading circumstances of this account with
Fleming’s story is remarkable; and had the Malvern incident occurred
in the superstitious sixteenth century instead of the scientific
nineteenth, it would no doubt have been regarded as a supernatural
visitation, and have furnished just such a marvellous story as that of
Bungay. In both cases, something was seen to enter a building during
a thunderstorm, killing two persons instantly and injuring others,
disappearing with a noise described in the one case as a violent clap
of thunder, and in the other as a terrific explosion, and leaving
behind visible marks of its progress in the material of the building.
In each instance, too, a person stationed outside saw something which
drove him from his place, but otherwise did not harm him; and in both
cases the body, whatever it was, which seemed to be the immediate
source of the mischief had a progressive motion, which, though swift,
could be followed by the eye. The chief point of difference is in
the appearance presented by the vehicle of the destructive agent.
In the one case it is likened to a black dog, and in the other to a
ball of fire, and it may be said that no two things could be more
unlike. As to the form of the so-called dog, little need be said.
It is admitted that the church at the time was in such a state of
‘palpable darknesse’ that one person could not perceive another; and
in the dark, any ill-defined object that can be perceived at all has a
tendency to assume a fantastic shape. It was accompanied by ‘fearful
flashes of fire,’ which seem to be distinguished from the lightning,
and the effect on those who were touched by it was that of scorching or
burning. Whether the vehicle which brought the destructive force into
the church, and which was thought to be a fiend, was a mass of highly
charged smoke or dust, or a miniature cloud of the kind which, on a
grand scale, passed over Malta on the 29th of October 1757, the effects
described correspond so entirely with those known to result from a
particular kind of thunderstroke, that we cannot accuse the author of
writing otherwise than in good faith. The supernatural colouring may
fairly be ascribed to want of knowledge in regard to a subject which,
even now, is but imperfectly understood. The Malta storm-cloud, which
destroyed nearly two hundred lives, and laid in ruins almost everything
in its way, is described by Brydone as being at first black, afterwards
changing its colour till it became like a flame of fire mixed with
black smoke; but he reports that despite the scientific explanations
of this extraordinary storm-cloud, the people declared with one voice
that it was a legion of demons let loose to punish them for their sins.
There were, says he, a thousand people in Malta that were ready to take
their oath that they saw the fiends within the cloud, ‘all as black as
pitch, and breathing out fire and brimstone.’

Besides those mentioned above, many other strange stories might be
instanced which, at the time, were accepted as true accounts of
supernatural appearances; and afterwards, when the general belief in
spiritual manifestations declined, were denounced as false, because
contrary to nature, but have since been recognised as consistent with
natural laws. By taking into account the surrounding circumstances,
the state of knowledge at the time, the customary modes of expression,
&c., we may, from many stories at first sight incredible, arrive at
a substratum of truth which may form a valuable addition to the sum
of human knowledge. Imbued with a sense of their own superior wisdom,
learned men, and others who have thought themselves learned, have
sometimes rashly pronounced as impossible, and therefore untrue,
phenomena which have since been accepted as facts. In Arago’s _Popular
Astronomy_ is an account of a meteorite which struck the earth at Lucé,
in the year 1769. It was perceived in the sky by several persons, who
watched its progress until it reached the surface of the earth, when
it was at once picked up and preserved; but the Academy of Sciences
pronounced it impossible for a solid body to have fallen from the
heavens. On the 24th of July 1790, a quantity of these stones fell at
St Juliac—in the fields, on the roofs of the houses, and in the streets
of the village. The fall was preceded by what is described as the
passing of a great fire, after which was heard in the air a very loud
and extraordinary noise. The facts were certified by the municipality
of the place and by some hundreds of the inhabitants; but the affair
was treated in the public journals as a ridiculous tale, calculated
to excite the compassion not merely of savants, but of all reasonable
persons.

Modern scientific research, while continually giving us fresh
revelations of that order in nature which is its supreme law, is at the
same time constantly narrowing the domain of the impossible. Even the
wild dreams of the alchemist appear, to the chemist and physicist of
to-day, less groundless than they did eighty or a hundred years ago.
The present century, the age of the railway, the electric light, the
telegraph and telephone, is certainly not less replete with marvels
than any of its predecessors. Many of the achievements of applied
science, to which we have now become habituated, if they could have
been related to a person living in the middle ages, would make as
great demands upon his credulity as the most wonderful stories of past
times do upon ours, and problems which have baffled the genius of all
past ages, and the insolvability of which had come to be regarded as
a matter of faith, have been solved in our own time. And yet we have
no ground for assuming that we have approached a limit in the field of
discovery, or for claiming finality in our interpretations of nature.
We have lifted a corner of the curtain, and are enabled to peep at some
of the machinery by which her operations are effected, but much more
remains concealed, and we know not what marvels may yet in course of
time be made clear to us. There are doubtless more things in heaven and
earth than are dreamt of—even in our philosophy.




BY ORDER OF THE LEAGUE.

BY FRED. M. WHITE.


IN TWENTY CHAPTERS.—CHAP. IV.

Five years have passed away, bringing strange changes and startling
revolutions—years, to some, fraught with misery and regret; years,
to others, which have been pregnant with fame and honour; but to the
suffering, patient world, only another step nearer to eternity. Five
years later, and night in the small German town where honour is wrecked
and lives are lost on the hazard of a die. The Kursaal at Homburg
sparkling with the glitter of ten thousand lights. Men of all nations
were gathered there, drawn together by the strongest cords which
bind human destiny—the power of gold. No type of face was wanting;
no passion, no emotion that the human visage is capable of, but had
its being there: rage, despair, misery, exultation—the whole gamut of
man’s passions and triumphs. Women were there too. The bluest-blood
recorded in the _Almanach de Gotha_ did not disdain to rub elbows with
the last fancy from the Comédie Française; my lord, cold, indifferent,
and smiling, sat side by side with the reckless plunger who would have
bartered his honour, had that commodity remained to him, for the gold
to place upon the colour. On the long green tables, the glittering
coins fell with a subdued chink sweeter than the finest music to the
hungry ears; a republic the most perfect in the universe, where rich
and poor alike are welcomed, with one great destiny—to lose or to gain.
There were no wild lamentations there; such vulgar exhibitions were out
of place, though feeling cannot be disguised under the deepest mask,
for a tremor of the eyelid, a flash of the eye, a convulsive movement
of the fingers, betray poor human nature. As the game proceeded
with the monotonous cry of the croupier, it was awful to watch the
intentness of the faces, how they deepened in interest as the game was
made, bending forward till at length ‘Rouge perd et couleur’ came from
the level voice again.

The croupiers raked in the glittering stacks of gold, silently,
swiftly, but with as much emotion as a child would gather cowslips, and
threw the winning on each stake as calmly, knowing full well that in
the flight of time it must return. The piles were raked up, and then
arose a murmur, a confusion of tongues, reminding the spectator of what
the bewilderment at Babel must have been, a clamour which died away to
silence at the inthralling ‘Faites votre jeu.’

How the hands clawed at the sparkling treasure; eager, trembling
avarice in every finger-tip; from the long, lean, yellow claw of the
old withered gamester, to the plump little hand of the bride, who is
trying her fortune with silver, fearful lest, driven by despair, some
less fortunate player should lay felonious fingers upon the piled-up
treasure.

Standing behind the all-absorbed group was a young man with pale,
almost ghostly features, and a heavy dark moustache. From his attitude
and smile, it was hard to say how fortune had served him, for his face
was void of any emotion. He held one piece of gold in his hand, placed
it on a colour, waited, and lost. A trifling movement of his lips,
pressed tightly together under the dark moustache—that was all. Then
for a moment he hesitated, pondered, and suddenly, as if to settle
the matter quickly, he detached a coin from his watchchain and leaned
forward again. Under him, seated at the table, was a woman winning
steadily. A pile of gold was before her; she was evidently in the
luckiest vein. The man, with all a gambler’s superstition, placed the
coin in her hand. ‘Stake for me,’ he whispered; ‘you have the luck.’

Mechanically, she took the proffered coin, and turned it in her hand;
then suddenly a wave of crimson, succeeded by a deathly whiteness, came
across her face. She held the coin, then put it carefully aside, and
staked another in its place. Then, apparently forgetting her emotion
in the all-absorbing interest of the game, she looked at the table.
‘Rouge gagne, et couleur perd,’ came the chant of the croupier. The
stakes were raked in, and the money lost. Under his breath, the man
uttered a fervent imprecation, slightly shrugged his shoulders, and
turned to watch the game again. From that moment the woman lost; her
pile dwindled away to one coin beyond the piece of metal tendered her
to stake, but still she played on, the man behind watching her play
intently. A little varying luck, at one moment a handful of napoleons,
at another, reduced to one, the game proceeded. At length the last but
one was gone, save the piece tendered to her by the man behind the
chair; that she never parted with. As she sat there, words came to her
ears vaguely—the voice of the man behind her, and every time he spoke
she shivered, as if a cold breath were passing through her heart. A
temporary run of luck came to her aid, and so she sat, listening and
playing.

The new-comer was another man, evidently an Italian, fine, strong, with
an open face and dark passionate eyes. He touched the first man upon
the shoulder lightly, speaking in excellent English.

There were four actors there, playing, had they but known it, a ghastly
tragedy. The two men were players; the listening woman was another; and
across the table, behind the spectators, stood a girl. She had a dark
southern face of great beauty—a face cleanly chiselled, and lighted by
a pair of wondrous black eyes—eyes bent upon the two men and the woman,
playing now with the keenest interest. She shrank back a little as the
new-comer entered, and her breath came a little quicker; but there she
stayed, watching and waiting for some opportunity. Her look boded ill
for some one. Meanwhile, the unconscious actors fixed their attention
on the game. The last arrival touched the other man upon the elbow
again, a little roughly this time.

‘You have been playing again, Hector?’ he said.

‘I have been playing my friend—yes. It is not in my nature to be in
such a place without. What would you have me do, Luigi? I am dying of
ennui from this inaction—kicking up my heels here waiting for orders.’

‘I should have thought you could have found something better to occupy
your time,’ the man addressed as Luigi returned. ‘Our work is too
stern, too holy, to be shared with such frivolity as this. Gold, gold,
with no thoughts of anything but this maddening scramble!’

‘My dear Luigi, pray, control yourself. Are you not aware that this
sort of thing has been done to death? Do not, as you love me, descend
to the level of the descriptive journalist, who comes over here to coin
his superlative condemnatory adjectives into money—to lose at this very
interesting game. John Bull holds up his hands in horror as he reads
the description in his _Telegraph_, and then he comes to try his luck
himself. I, Hector le Gautier, have seen a bishop here.’

‘How fond you are of the sound of your own voice,’ Luigi Salvarini
returned. ‘Come outside; I have something important to say to you.’

‘Something connected with the League, I suppose,’ Le Gautier yawned.
‘If it was not yourself I was talking to, I should say, confusion to
the League.’

‘How rash you are!’ Salvarini returned in a low tone, accompanied by
an admiring glance at his companion. ‘Consider what one word spoken
lightly might mean to you. The attendants here, the croupier even,
might be a Number in the League.’

‘Very likely,’ Le Gautier replied carelessly; ‘but it is not probable
that, if I should whisper the magic words in his ear, he would give
me credit for a few napoleons. I am in no mood for business to-night,
Luigi; and if you are the good fellow I take you for, you will lend
me’——

‘One Brother must always aid another according to his means, says the
decree. But, alas! I have nothing.—I came to you with the intention’——

‘Oh, did you?’ Le Gautier asked sardonically. ‘Then, in that case, I
must look elsewhere; a few francs is all my available capital.’

‘Hector,’ the Italian exclaimed suddenly, in a hoarse whisper,
‘where is the?’—— He did not finish his sentence, but pointed to the
watchchain the other was idly twirling in his fingers.

Le Gautier smiled sarcastically. ‘It is gone,’ he said lightly—‘gone
to swell the bloated coffers of the bank. Fortune, alas! had no favour
even for that mystic coin. Sacred as it should have been, I am its
proud possessor no more.’

‘You are mad, utterly mad!’ Salvarini exclaimed. ‘If it were but
known—if it has fallen into the hands of the bank, or a croupier
happens to have a Number, think of what it means to you! The coin would
be forwarded to the Central Council; the signs would be called in;
yours missing’——

‘And one of these admirable German daggers would make acquaintance with
my estimable person, with no consolation but the fact of knowing what a
handsome corpse I shall make. Bah! A man can only die once, and so long
as they do not make me the posthumous hero of a horrible tragedy, I do
not care. It is not so very serious, my Luigi.’

‘It _is_ serious; you know it is,’ Luigi retorted. ‘No Brother of the
League would have had the sublime audacity, the reckless courage’——

‘L’audace, l’audace, toujours l’audace,’ Le Gautier returned. ‘I sigh
for new temptations; the sight of the gaming-table is to me what the
smell of battle afar off is to the war-horse. I came here intending to
risk a louis; I have lost everything. There is nothing like courage at
the tables; and as it had a spice of danger in it, I risked’——

‘Your life! You do not seem to comprehend the danger.’

‘But, my dear friend, it is exactly that spice of danger that gives the
thing its nameless charm. Come, you are hipped, out of sorts. You see
the duties of the Order in every action; you see the uplifting of the
avenging dagger in every shadow that trembles on the wall. Be a man!’

‘I am all the more disturbed,’ Salvarini observed with moody, uneasy
face, ‘that the orders have come. That is the principal reason I am
here to look for you. We are translated to London.’

‘That is good news, at anyrate,’ Le Gautier exclaimed briskly. ‘I have
been literally dying to get back there. By the bright eyes of Enid——
What is that?’

Above the clamour of tongues and the rattle of the gold pieces, a low
laugh was heard distinctly close to the speaker’s elbow. He turned
sharply round; but there was no one within a few feet of them.
Apparently, it had not disturbed the inthralled players, though the
croupier swept his cold eye around to discover the author of this
unseemly mirth.

‘Strange!’ Le Gautier observed. ‘I seem to have heard that laugh
before, though I cannot remember where.’

‘And so have I,’ Salvarini whispered hoarsely—‘only once, and I hope
that I may never hear it again. It is horrible!’

Le Gautier looked at his companion, amazed to see the agitation
pictured on his face. It was white and drawn, as if with some inward
pain. Salvarini wiped his damp brow as he met the other’s piercing
gaze, and tried to still the trembling of his limbs.

‘A passing fancy,’ he explained—‘a fancy which called up a remembrance
of my boyhood, the recollection of a vengeance as yet unpaid.—But I am
idling; let us get outside. The orders have come, as I tell you, for
London. We are to meet the Head Centre at the old address.’

‘And how did the orders come?’ Le Gautier asked.

‘The old mysterious way,’ was the impatient reply; ‘secrecy and
darkness; no trust in any one, however worthy he may have proved—the
old suspicion, which drags us down, and holds our hands even in the
act of striking. I found them on my table when I got in. You and I are
to get to London, and there await orders. Our instructions bear the
crossed daggers, indicating extreme secrecy and a mission of great
danger.’

In spite of his _sang froid_, Le Gautier could not repress a slight
start; and a smile of covert sarcasm, pity almost, rose to his lips as
he looked in his companion’s eager, enthusiastic face; the same sort
of pity the sharper feels for his unconscious victim when he has him
within the toils. Not that the younger man noticed this; his eyes were
full of some far-away project, something noble, by their expression.

‘The old story of the monkey and the chestnuts,’ Le Gautier observed
with his most sinister smile; ‘the puppets run the risk, and the Head
Centres get the glory. If we fall, it is in freedom’s name. That is
sufficient epitaph for us poor, silly, fluttering moths.’

‘But the glory of it!’ Salvarini cried—‘think of that!’

‘The glory, yes—the glory of a felon’s grave! The glory lies in the
uncertainty. What do we gain, you and I, by the removal of crowned
heads? When the last tyrant fell at our leader’s dictate, how much did
we benefit by the blow? He was not a bad man; for a king, he was just.’

‘You are in a bitter mood, to-night, Hector,’ Salvarini answered.
‘What will you say when I tell you the appointment has come with your
nomination as a Deputy, with a seat at the Council of the Crimson Nine?’

‘My appointment at last! You are joking, Luigi. Surely they had need of
better men than I. What of La Fontaine?’

‘Dead,’ Salvarini responded grimly. ‘Treachery was suspected, and it
was necessary to remove him.—But what I tell you is true; you are
ordered to be present at the next Council at Warsaw, two months hence,
when you will give up your badge as an Avenger, and take the premier
order.’

‘And I have staked it to-night on the hazard of a die!’ Le Gautier
exclaimed, pallid even beyond his usual deathly whiteness. ‘Fool, fool
that I was! How can I prevent it becoming known? I am undone!’

‘You do not know the worst,’ Salvarini replied. ‘Come closer, and let
me whisper in your ears; even the walls carry such tidings. The Supreme
Director is here!’

Le Gautier turned faint and sick as he looked furtively round the room,
with its long mirrors and barbaric splendour.

‘Suppose you lend me yours?’ he suggested. ‘You will not want it now.
What a mad fool I have been! I wonder if there is any way of recovering
it? for I must have it, come what will. With a penalty of’——

‘Death!’

The word, abruptly, sternly uttered, was followed by the same low
mocking laugh they had heard before. They looked around in alarm, but
no trace of any one could be seen. Standing in the recess of a window,
they looked out; but no sign of the mysterious warning, so strangely
given.

‘Let us get away from this,’ Le Gautier groaned. ‘I am stifled! Come
outside into the open air. My nerves must be unstrung to-night.’

They walked out through the high folding-doors, and disappeared in
the darkness. As they left, the woman who had been playing rose from
her seat and followed them. Apparently, she was too late, for they
had vanished; and with a sigh, she abandoned her evident intention,
turning into the Kursaal gardens and throwing herself into a seat.
Directly she quitted the saloon, the woman with the dark eyes followed,
and tracked the other to the quiet retreat. For some time she stood
behind the shadow of a tree, watching her. It was a brilliant moonlight
night—clear, calm, and peaceful. Without there, the lighted windows of
the gambling saloon could be seen; and ever and anon the murmur of the
croupier, the scrape of the rakes, and the subdued clink of the gold,
might be heard. But the figure on the seat did not heed these things;
she was looking at a coin in her hand, making out as she best could the
devices that it bore, strange and puzzling to her.

It was merely a gold coin, in fine a moidore of Portugal; and upon the
reverse side, the figure had been rubbed down, and an emblem engraved
in its place. There was a figure of Liberty gazing at a rising sun,
her foot upon a prostrate dead body, and underneath the words, ‘I
strike.’ Over the rising sun, in tiny letters, was the device, ‘In
Freedom’s name;’ and at the top, two letters in a monogram. The seated
figure noted these things, but, from the expression on her face, they
represented nothing to her. Behind the shadow of the tree, the watcher
crept closer and closer, trying in vain to get a glimpse of the golden
coin. As the seated figure bent over it, tears began to gather in
her eyes, overflowing at last, and the passion of sorrow seemed to
rise, till her frame was shaken with the sobs she did not strive to
master. The woman looking on stepped out from her shelter and crossed
the open grass to the other’s side. Her face, on the contrary, was
eager, almost hopeful, as she bent forward and touched the weeper on
the shoulder. She looked up, surprise mastering her grief for a brief
moment.




ARMY PANICS: BY ONE WHO HAS BEEN IN THEM.


Few men have gone through a campaign of any duration without having
experienced some one or more of those strange incidents of warfare
which are known under the name of Panics. Those who have been in them
know but too well their peculiarity—how a sudden access of fear seizing
upon a body of troops, and communicating itself from man to man with
a rapidity that can only be compared to a conflagration in a city
built of wood, spreads so quickly that it is impossible to detect its
cause, and the coolest observer cannot tell whence the contagion had
its origin. Amongst raw levies or young and inexperienced soldiery,
such panics are naturally more frequent than amongst tried troops; but
history tells us that even the oldest veterans are not proof against
their attack.

Napier, in his _Peninsular War_, devotes but some eight or nine lines
to an account of the most remarkable recorded incident of this nature,
in which Robert Crauford’s celebrated Light Division—consisting
of those three distinguished regiments, the 43d, the 52d, and the
95th—were seized and put to flight by an attack of fear so sudden and
causeless that the historian makes no attempt whatever to ascribe
a reason for it. ‘The Light Division,’ he writes, ‘encamped in a
pinewood, where happened one of those extraordinary panics attributed
in ancient times to the influence of a god. No enemy was near, no alarm
given, when suddenly the troops, as if seized with a frenzy, started
from sleep and disappeared in every direction; nor was there any
possibility of allaying this strange terror, until some persons called
out that the enemy’s cavalry were amongst them, when the soldiers
mechanically ran together, and the illusion was dissipated.’ It seems
odd that so diffuse a writer should have seen fit to say so little of
so extraordinary an occurrence, more especially when we remember that
this same Light Division was the flower of the British army in the
Peninsula, and that he writes of it not many pages before as ‘composed
of three regiments singularly fitted for difficult service. Long and
carefully disciplined by Sir John Moore, they came to the field with
such a knowledge of arms, that six years of warfare could not detect
a flaw in their system, nor were they ever overmatched in courage and
skill.’

The public has been made acquainted with a goodly number of panics
during the last few years, the military annals of which have been
so replete with the warlike operations of the British arms. Many of
us have thrown up our hands and sighed over the decadence of the
pristine virtue of our soldiers, or prophesied darkly the downfall
of the whole British race. The reason why the world nowadays is more
familiar with many of the shortcomings and failings of our troops is
not very difficult to find. As, before Agamemnon, lived many brave
men whose virtues have not been handed down, so too, perhaps, many
little indiscretions on the part of the soldiers of Marlborough and
Wellington have passed into oblivion through want of a ‘special war
correspondent.’ In spite of press censorship on the part of military
officers, sooner or later these lynx-eyed gentlemen, being in the midst
of the fighting-men, have seen and recorded in the columns of the
daily press very many incidents, the seriousness of which has not been
lessened in the telling. Amongst soldiers themselves, a natural pride
would make them reticent in such matters; and _l’esprit de corps_ has
probably caused more than we know of to be buried in the bosoms of the
members of some particular corps.

This reminds us of an unrecorded case of ‘panic’ pure and simple, which
was communicated to us, years after its occurrence, by an officer in
the regiment concerned. When he spoke of it, he did so with the air of
a man fearful of breaking a sacred trust, which even then he seemed to
feel hardly justified in betraying, though the regiment had changed
its title, and scarcely one of the members in it at the time still
remained. Suffice it to say that the regiment was a distinguished
infantry one, composed almost entirely of veterans, who had added
lustre to their former glories by the courage and bravery with which
they had behaved throughout the trying times of the Indian Mutiny.
It was shortly after this terrible outbreak had been quelled that
the regiment in question was marching from the scene of some of the
bloodiest outrages to a new station in a comparatively undisturbed
portion of India. Then, as now, marches in that country were usually
carried out at night, the sun in the hot season rendering exposure to
its influence more or less unsafe to Europeans. They had almost reached
the spot where they were to halt for the night—which, by-the-bye,
was an exceptionally dark one—in fact, the advance-party had already
arrived, when suddenly some sort of commotion and press of men from the
rear was noticed by the officers. Before they could divine the cause,
the confusion increased, and the regiment, without paying any heed to
the commands of the officers, broke its ranks, and fled precipitately
into the jungle on either side of the road. As usual, the officers, and
even the senior non-commissioned officers, had not shared the general
terror, and some few of the privates had at first called upon their
comrades to remain steady—but all to no avail. They were regularly
broken, and scarcely a man remained. Very soon, an explanation was
forthcoming. A number of loose horses came galloping down the road.
It was the noise of their hoofs over the hard ground, breaking the
stillness of the Indian night, that had mysteriously magnified itself
into a vague but all-mastering terror. How complete the panic was may
be imagined from the fact that many of the men had fled so far into
the jungle that they did not return till the following morning. Every
inquiry was made by the colonel into the case; but no one was ever made
responsible as the originator; and the regiment mutually agreed to keep
the whole affair a profound secret. So well did they do so, that it
never leaked out till years afterwards, when time had blunted the sting
of publicity.

In South Africa, the disaster of Isandlhwana gave the soldiers’ nerves
a severe shaking, and it often happened that false alarms at night
led to the rousing of whole camps, and sometimes even to a reckless
discharge of firearms. In some cases, friendly natives or even comrades
were taken by the excited imagination of a sentry for enemies; in
others, unoffending cattle, even a bush or a shrub, became the innocent
cause of a fusilade sufficient to have dealt widespread destruction to
a host of Zulus.

An odd incident, illustrative of the slightness of the cause—or even,
perhaps, of the absence of any cause at all—that gives rise to a
panic, occurred on the night of Tel-el-Kebir, amidst a small corner of
the force that was bivouacking on the battlefield. The narrator had
crawled into a marquee in which, with other commissariat stores, were
the rum casks from which the troops had received their liquor ration
after the fatigues and excitement of the day’s fight and previous
night-march. Besides one or two commissariat issuers in charge of the
stores, several ‘odds and ends’ of other corps had found their way into
the marquee, preferring to rest under its shelter amidst the casks
and biscuit-boxes, than under the open sky with the sand for a bed.
Suddenly, in the middle of the night when all were sleeping, a noise
and commotion began in the bivouac outside. Before the inhabitants of
the tent were sufficiently awake to understand its cause, the curtains
were thrust aside by a red-coated soldier, who shouted to us to get
up: ‘The Arabs are in the camp—they are upon us!’ Then he disappeared
as rapidly as he had come. Every one sprang to his arms, and probably
experienced that especially uncomfortable sensation that is caused by
a vague feeling of an unseen though imminent danger against which one
is ignorant how to guard. Outside, every one around was aroused and
up, eagerly striving to discover from what quarter attack was to be
expected. Nothing, however, more unpleasant occurred than the advent of
a staff-officer asking the cause of the confusion. Probably the truth
never did reach headquarters. Afterwards, however, a report gained
ground—no other or better reason was ever forthcoming—that the alarm
arose from the screams of a sleeping soldier, who, overwrought perhaps
by the horrors of the day, had been fighting his battle over again in
his dreams!

It is perhaps as well that all cases of panic should be brought forward
and investigated. Hushing them up may be satisfactory to those who feel
that the credit and reputation of their particular regiment or corps
are at stake; but, like all undeclared and secret evils, they are best
dealt with by being dragged to light. How else can the soldier learn
their absurdity—how else learn to recognise them and reason on the
moment whether he be in the presence of a causeless panic or a real
danger?

One lesson certainly the few lines of Napier quoted above teach us. The
cry of some one that the enemy’s cavalry were amongst them caused the
Light Division to rally—it was the dissipation of a vague terror by
the substitution for it of a substantial danger.

Enough has been said to show that panics will occur. It is easy to see
how fatal may be their results, and how detrimental they are to the
_morale_ of an army. A recognition of this fact must convince us of the
necessity that exists for neglecting no step that may tend to minimise
their occurrence, or, if they must occur, to most efficaciously and
speedily counteract their effects. Long since, sailors learnt by
experience that real or imagined outbreaks of fire on shipboard were
too apt to cause panic and confusion, and thereby increase tenfold
the horrors of the situation. To provide against this, the fire-alarm
is frequently sounded, with a view to accustoming the crew to take up
rapidly their allotted posts, when fire actually does occur, with the
calmness and despatch bred of familiarity. This system of accustoming
men to sudden alarms of attack was practised with success in the Marine
Camp round Suakim, and they probably owed the idea in some measure to
their naval training. At anyrate, their camp was particularly free from
needless night-alarms, and their sentries earned the somewhat rare
distinction of never having been forced throughout the whole campaign.




GEORGE HANNAY’S LOVE AFFAIR.


CHAPTER I.—TOO LATE!

There was a sharp but not unpleasant smell of frost in the air;
the small shrubbery around the way-side station of Lochenbreck was
covered with a slight coating of hoar-frost, which was being gradually
dissipated by the golden rays of the sun, now two or three degrees
above the horizon. The bustle of the Twelfth had passed. The ‘knowing
ones’ who prefer Wigtownshire moors to those of the West and North
Highlands, as being lower rented and yielding quite as good sport, had
come and gone, for it was now the latter end of September. It was about
eight o’clock A.M.; the South train was due, and it was timed to stop
here for five minutes; not so much on account of any passenger or goods
traffic it might deposit or receive, as to allow the iron horse to take
a huge drink, sufficient to carry it in comfort to Stranraer. That this
particular morning, however, there was some passenger traffic expected
was evident. Outside the station stood a wagonette, a pony-cart, and
a smart ostler in charge of both; inside was the station-master, a
porter, and a young lady. The two former were listening for the clang
of the signal-bell announcing the train; the latter, in prosaic truth,
was endeavouring to keep her feet warm, by pacing rapidly up and down
the limited platform. She was a very pretty girl, with a clear, pinky
freshness of complexion, a finely chiselled nose, and a small, sweet,
though firm mouth.

The signal-bell clanged, and the train came grandly sweeping in. There
was but one passenger, but that was the one the young lady was waiting
for. When he alighted, she ran forward and gave him her hand, which he
shook heartily.

‘Alone?’ she cried.

‘Yes, Nan, alone this time! You’re not sorry, are you?’

‘Oh, no, no! I’ll have you all to myself! And you’ll have such lots
of new London stories to tell, and none of your awfully clever city
friends to laugh at me.’

The new arrival’s portmanteau, fishing-rods, &c., were put in the
pony-cart, and assisting the young girl into the wagonette, he took the
reins and started at a smart trot towards Lochenbreck Inn, some eight
miles away over the purple moor.

While they are enjoying the heather-scented air, and the delightful
moorland scenery, from which the sun had now dispelled the early
morning’s mist, it may be as well that the reader should know who the
occupants of the wagonette were. _Place aux dames;_ Anne Porteous,
aged nineteen, was the daughter of Robert Porteous, innkeeper at
Lochenbreck. Robert, however, was not an ordinary innkeeper. He
certainly took in guests for bed and board, and, as was said by some,
charged very highly for the accommodation; but beyond this, he was
proprietor of a loch, and most of the moor encircling it, and could
thus give free angling and shooting privileges to his guests. He was
quite independent of innkeeping as a means of living; but his father
and grandfather before him had kept the inn, and why should not he?
Early in life he was left a widower, and Anne was his only daughter.
She received an excellent education at S—— Academy, and really
took charge of the inn business, for her father was crippled with
rheumatism. Her management, however, was an unseen one, for she did not
come personally in contact with the guests. But there were exceptions
to that rule. One of them was her present companion, George Hannay, the
editor of the London magazine, the _Olympic_. But then the case with
him was different from that of an ordinary guest. Her father and he
were old friends, and he had been coming about the place since she was
a girl in short frocks. The editor was a very keen angler, and as the
sport could best be pursued off a boat, when Anne grew older and strong
enough, it was her whim and pleasure to row him about while he wielded
the rod. Thus they grew great friends; and his autumn visit was looked
forward to with joyous expectancy by little Nan. Little, she was not
now; years had glided away, and she had almost emerged into womanhood;
but still the old friendly relations were kept up between the two. Last
summer she had spent with her father’s sister, who kept a _pension_
in Brussels, and it is about her experiences there that the pair are
chatting gaily as the vehicle rolls homewards over the leaf-bestrewn
road.

As for the editor, he was a tallish, well-developed man, with dark
hair, whiskers, and moustache considerably more than sprinkled with
gray. At first sight you would guess his age at about fifty. But having
regard to his light springy step and genial smile, you might have set
him down at about forty, and still have been wrong, for in truth he
was only thirty-eight. It was a grand relief for him to leave the
Metropolis and his editorial worries behind once a year, and spend a
glorious autumn holiday at Lochenbreck—fishing, talking with his old
friend Robert, and—well—yes! (of late years, that is to say) enjoying a
chat with his pretty little daughter. It was not accidentally that he
came alone this time. Usually he brought a roistering squad of literary
bohemians, who made the ceiling of the private parlour ring with jest
and song till unseemly hours of the morning. And the reason was, he
came prepared to offer his heart and hand to the fair Nan! He did not
imagine for a moment he was in love with her. Oh, no! he was too old
and sedate for such nonsense as that. In his professional capacity he
had dissected and analysed so many excruciatingly sentimental love
tales, that he imagined himself Cupid-proof. But things had driven his
thoughts towards matrimony. He had got tired of his lady-housekeeper,
with her Cockneyfied vulgar airs. Now, if he could only get rid of
her, he thought, pension her off, or get another situation for her,
and place this Scotch girl at the head of his table, how much brighter
life would seem to him! Would she take him? Well, he thought she would.
Of one thing he was certain, she was really fond of him; there was no
rival in the way; and the father was certain to favour the match. He
did not care for girlish gush; sound lasting affection, and purity and
singleness of mind, were what he wanted.

The wagonette had now arrived at the inn—a quaint old crow-stepped
edifice, half covered with ivy, and surrounded by a garden-wall. Old
Mr Porteous was at the door, and bade his guest a hearty welcome. Then
Anne set to work, and in less than half an hour there was a tempting
breakfast smoking on the private parlour table, which Mr Hannay did
excellent justice to. To keep him company, his host and hostess sat
at table with him, and made believe to partake of the dainties before
them; while the truth was, they had had a hearty breakfast three hours
before. The sun, which till now had brightened up the room, became
overcast, and a few drops from a passing shower rattled against the
diamond-paned window. Mr Hannay rose from his chair and looked out.
A splendid day for fishing. ‘Come, Nan, my lass,’ he said, ‘let’s to
work. It’s a shame to sit here idling, with the loch in such fine trim
for trouting.’

‘Well, sir, I suppose I must obey orders,’ she rejoined, and tripping
up-stairs, soon returned arrayed in an old frock, and a headpiece of
stiff white calico, resembling in design a sou’wester, and suited to
protect from sun, rain, or wind. Half an hour later they were floating
on the loch; Nan slowly paddling along, her companion industriously
whipping the water; both keeping up a desultory conversation. Her
experiences at Brussels naturally formed the chief topic. On this
subject she spoke with enthusiasm. She had never seen Paris, therefore
its miniature presentment impressed her all the more vividly. Hannay
was pleased to hear scenes described with her fresh girlish fervour,
to which he had long been _blasé_. Apart from the warm feelings he
had towards her, her conversation had a literary charm for him, for
she was a born narrator. She took him with her in all her rambles and
escapades, and her six months’ residence in the gay little capital
seemed exposed to his mental vision as clearly as if he had been her
companion. Yet the sly little damsel forgot, quite innocently of
course, to tell him of sundry moonlight walks with a certain Scotch
student, under the linden trees of the Boulevard des Alliers.

The fishing was progressing but slowly. Perhaps there was thunder
in the air; or possibly the angler’s mind was abstracted, and he
was thinking of matters of weightier import, than the capture of a
few silvery trout. After missing excellent ‘offers’ on two or three
occasions, his companion burst into a merry laugh, and asked him if
his wits had gone a wool-gathering, ‘I am afraid,’ she continued,
gravely shaking her head, ‘that you are still in love with that wicked
Mademoiselle Sylvestre.’

Now, the lady referred to was an aged ex-prima donna of the English
opera, and a warm friend of his. It pleased Nan, however, to
make-believe that their relationship to each other was of a strongly
amorous nature, and she missed no opportunity of teasing him about her.
Now was a chance to broach the matter he had at heart. For, strange to
say, this experienced man of literature and society, this ornament of
London drawing-rooms, felt oddly embarrassed in his new relationship
of suitor to a simple country girl. True it was, she had no idea of
the terrible designs he had on her heart and liberty; but that seemed
only to make the matter worse in his eyes. There was not an atom of
self-consciousness about her. Her clear gray eyes were crystalline; he
fancied he could read every thought of her soul in their transparent
depths. No thoughts of love there evidently. It looked almost brutal to
disturb their sweet maidenly repose—almost like shooting a trusting,
tame rabbit. If there had been but the least spice of coquetry about
her, it would have been so much easier for him to have unburdened
himself of his heart’s secret—at least so he thought. He never felt so
morally limp in all his life, and it was with the courage of despair
that he wound up his reel and determined to know his fate then and
there. A few intermittent drops of rain began to fall, and seating
himself beside her on the thwarts, he shared his waterproof with her.
He never yet had spoken, save in the language of raillery; how on earth
was he now to address her in accents of love and sentiment? However, it
must be done; and he took ‘a header.’

‘My dear Nan,’ he began, ‘it is really too bad of you to mention that
estimable old lady. I like her very much, as I am sure would you if you
knew her. But she might easily be my mother! Ah, Nan,’ he continued,
slipping his arm round her waist underneath the waterproof—‘ah, Nan,
there is only one girl in all the world I care a pin for, and it is
your own sweet self! Nan—will you be my wife?’

As he spoke the last few words, Nan’s face grew deadly pale; then the
truant blood rushed back to her cheeks tumultuously, flushing them
carmine.

‘Oh, no, no!’ she piteously cried as she shrunk from him, and gently
disengaged his arm from round her waist; ‘oh, no! Mr Hannay, that
can never, never be! O how stupid and foolish I’ve been. Forgive me,
forgive me, my dearest of friends! But—but—indeed I never looked on you
in any way like that. I have been very imprudent—I have been far too
free with you—but it was all thoughtlessness. Tell me you don’t for a
moment believe I was so wicked as to have done it purposely.’

She put her hands over her face, and sobbed aloud. Here was a nice
position for a lover to be in, who an hour ago was confidently dreaming
of years of sweet companionship with her who now told him in language
not to be misunderstood that such could never, never be. These were
not the simulated tears and sobs of a heartless coquette; the honest
simple girl had evidently never dreamed of the possibility of him being
a wooer. He was too old—that was it. And what a fool he had made of
himself! Well, he would just require to swallow it all, and comfort
himself with the reflection that no one knew of his folly, for he knew
_she_ would never tell. His heart went out in pity to her. He told her
never to mind. He even went the length of pretending that he was almost
glad she had refused him, for he was so wedded to city life, with its
clubs, greenrooms, and what not, that he was certain he would have been
a very careless, inattentive husband, and she a neglected, heart-broken
wife. In such wise did he comfort the girl, who dried her eyes and
tried to look quite gay and cheerful. There was no more fishing; they
rowed slowly back to the hotel. Nan insisted on taking the oars; her
rejected lover sat musing at the stern. Suddenly he raised his head,
and said with a sedate smile: ‘Some one else, eh, Nan?’

His question was not very intelligibly put; but she understood well
enough what he meant. Drooping eyelids, a face slightly averted, and a
faint blush for answer. After a pause, ‘Papa does not know—at least not
yet,’ she timidly said; ‘you’ll not tell him?’

‘Oh, of course not!’ he answered, and biting the end of a fresh cigar,
began smoking vigorously. A few minutes, and they were at the Inn
jetty, and to old Mr Porteous’ extreme astonishment, without a fin to
show for their three hours’ work.

Dinner past, father and daughter and guest adjourned to the private
parlour. Anne retired early under the plea of headache. Host and guest
continued to enjoy a cheerful glass and gossip all to themselves.

‘By-the-bye, Mr Porteous,’ said the latter as he was lighting his
candle preparatory to going up-stairs to bed, ‘I forgot to say my stay
this time will be but a brief one. I am expecting every day to have a
letter from a friend at Lucerne who wants me to join him in the fishing
there. He says the sport is excellent, and I promised to go if he found
such to be the case. Good-night!’

The landlord was astonished, but was too well bred to press him to
stay. The truth is, our friend had been far more seriously ‘hit’ by
simple Nan than he had supposed, or was even yet inclined to admit.
Try as he would, sleep refused to come to his tired brain; mocking
visions of ‘what might have been’ flitted through his waking dreams;
and he arose in the morning more tired than when he went to bed. The
post brought him two letters; one of them, he said, required his
instant presence in London on an important matter of business; after
that, he would go to Switzerland to join his friend in the fishing; and
meantime, he would have reluctantly to bid them farewell. Porteous was
both surprised and vexed; his daughter was neither, for she felt it
would be happier for them both to be apart—at least for the present.




LANDSLIPS.


Scarcely less alarming than the fall of an avalanche, and sometimes,
indeed, far more destructive, are those sudden descents of earth
and other materials commonly known as landslips. The cause of these
remarkable calamities—for such they commonly are—may be briefly
described. The strata of a mountain or lesser elevation are often found
to deviate considerably from a horizontal position; and if shale or any
other substance pervious to water forms the lowest stratum, a landslip
may take place. For instance, if there be an abundance of rain or
melted snow, which percolates down so as to soften the lower stratum,
the upper strata are liable to be loosened, and, in process of time, to
slide away. Such was the case in Shropshire towards the close of last
century, as related by Mr Fletcher of Madeley. This took place at a
spot on the Severn between the Grove and the Birches. ‘The first thing
that struck me,’ says Mr Fletcher, ‘was the destruction of the little
bridge that separated the parish of Madeley from that of Buildwas,
and the total disappearing of the turnpike road to Buildwas Bridge,
instead of which, nothing presented itself to my view but a confused
heap of bushes and huge clods of earth, tumbled one over another. The
river also wore a different aspect; it was shallow, noisy, boisterous,
and came down from a different point. Following the track made by a
great number of spectators who came from the neighbouring parishes, I
climbed over the ruins and came to a field well grown with ryegrass,
where the ground was greatly cracked in several places, and where large
turfs—some entirely, others half-turned up—exhibited the appearance of
straight or crooked furrows, as though imperfectly formed by a plough
drawn at a venture. Getting from that field over the hedge into a part
of the road which was yet visible, I found it raised in one place,
sunk in another, concave in a third, hanging on one side in a fourth,
and contracted as if some uncommon force had pressed the two hedges
together. But the higher part of it surprised me most, and brought
directly to remembrance those places of Mount Vesuvius where the solid
stony lava had been strongly marked by repeated earthquakes; for the
hard beaten gravel which formed the surface of the road was broken
every way into huge masses, partly detached from each other, with deep
apertures between them, exactly like the shattered lava. This striking
likeness of circumstances made me conclude that the similar effect
might proceed from the same cause, namely, a strong convulsion on the
surface, if not in the bowels, of the earth.’

This conjecture was not confirmed by facts and circumstances related
by others; indeed, the latter part of his description proves, almost
beyond question, that the various results described were occasioned by
a landslip, and not by a shock of an earthquake, of which no one heard
anything.

He continues: ‘Going a little further towards Buildwas, I found that
the road was again totally lost for a considerable space, having been
overturned, absorbed, or tumbled, with the hedges that bounded it, to
a considerable distance towards the river. This part of the desolation
appeared then to me inexpressibly dreadful. Between a shattered field
and the river, there was that morning a bank, on which, besides a
great deal of underwood, grew twenty-five large oaks; this wood shot
with such violence into the Severn before it, that it forced the
water in great volumes a considerable height, like a mighty fountain,
and gave the overflowing river a retrograde motion. This is not the
only accident which happened to the Severn, for, near the Grove, the
channel, which was chiefly of a soft blue rock, burst in ten thousand
pieces, and rose perpendicularly about ten yards, heaving up the
immense quantity of water and the shoal of fishes that were therein.’

John Philips in his work on _Cider_ alludes to Marcley Hill as the
scene of a landslip:

    I nor advise, nor reprehend, the choice
    Of Marcley Hill; the apple nowhere finds
    A kinder mould; yet ’tis unsafe to trust
    Deceitful ground; who knows but that, once more,
    This mount may journey, and, his present site
    Forsaking, to thy neighbour’s bounds transfer
    The goodly plants, affording matter strange
    For law debates.

Marcley Hill is near the confluence of the Lug and Wye, about six miles
east of Hereford. In the year 1595, it was, says Mr Brown, the editor
of White’s _Selborne_, ‘after roaring and shaking in a terrible manner
for three days together, about six o’clock on Sunday morning put in
motion, and continued moving for eight hours, in which time it advanced
upwards of two hundred feet from its first position, and mounted
seventy-two feet higher than it was before. In the place where it set
out, it left a gap four hundred feet long, and three hundred and twenty
broad; and in its progress it overthrew a chapel, together with trees
and houses that stood in its way.’

That interesting naturalist, Mr White of Selborne, gives at length,
in one of his letters to the Honourable Daines Barrington, an account
of an extraordinary landslip in his own neighbourhood, at a date
corresponding with that of the landslip in Shropshire. He says: ‘The
months of January and February 1774 were remarkable for great melting
snows and vast gluts of rain, so that, by the end of the latter
month, the land springs, or _levants_ [eastern; so called, I suppose,
because of the prevalence of easterly winds at this season], began to
prevail, and to be near as high as in the memorable winter of 1764. The
beginning of March also went on in the same tenor, when in the night
between the 8th and 9th of that month, a considerable part of the
great woody hanger [a local term for an overhanging woody cliff] at
Hawkley was torn from its place and fell down, leaving a high freestone
cliff naked and bare, and resembling the steep side of a chalk-pit. It
appears that this huge fragment, being perhaps sapped and undermined
by waters, foundered, and was ingulfed, going down in a perpendicular
direction; for a gate which stood in the field on the top of the hill,
after sinking with its posts for thirty or forty feet, remained in so
true and upright a position as to open and shut with great exactness,
just as in its first situation. Several oaks also are still standing
[written in 1775 or 1776] and in a state of vegetation, after taking
the same desperate leap.

‘That great part of this prodigious mass was absorbed in some gulf
below is plain also from the inclining ground at the bottom of the
hill, which is free and unencumbered, but would have been buried in
heaps of rubbish, had the fragment parted and fallen forward. About a
hundred yards from the foot of this hanging coppice stood a cottage
by the side of a lane; and two hundred yards lower, on the other
side of the lane, was a farmhouse, in which lived a labourer and his
family; and just by, a stout new barn. The cottage was inhabited by
an old woman, her son, and his wife. These people, in the evening,
which was very dark and tempestuous, observed that the brick floors
of their kitchens began to heave and part, and that the walls seemed
to open and the roofs to crack; but they all agree that no tremor of
the ground indicating an earthquake was ever felt, only that the wind
continued to make a tremendous roaring in the woods and hangers. The
miserable inhabitants, not daring to go to bed, remained in the utmost
solicitude and confusion, expecting every moment to be buried under the
ruins of their shattered edifices. When daylight came, they were at
leisure to contemplate the devastations of the night. They then found
that a deep rift, or chasm, had opened under their houses, and torn
them as it were in two, and that one end of the barn had suffered in a
similar manner; that a pond near the cottage had undergone a strange
reverse, becoming deep at the shallow end, and so _vice versâ_; that
many large oaks were removed out of their perpendicular, some thrown
down, and some fallen into the heads of neighbouring trees; and that a
gate was thrust forward with its hedge full six feet, so as to require
a new track to be made to it. From the foot of the cliff, the general
course of the ground, which is pasture, inclines in a moderate descent
for half a mile, and is interspersed with some hillocks, which were
lifted in every direction, as well towards the great woody hanger
as from it. In the first pasture the deep clefts began, and running
across the lane and under the buildings, made such vast shelves that
the road was impassable for some time; and so over to an arable field
on the other side, which was strangely torn and disordered. The second
pasture-field, being more soft and springy, was protruded forward
without many fissures in the turf, which was raised in long ridges
resembling graves, lying at right angles to the motion. At the bottom
of this inclosure, the soil and turf rose many feet against the bodies
of some oaks that obstructed their further course, and terminated this
awful commotion.’

Passing by a number of catastrophes of this nature occurring at earlier
dates, we propose to give some interesting particulars concerning one
which took place in the early part of this century in Switzerland,
where they are very frequent.

In one corner of the canton of Schweitz are the lakes Wallenstadt,
Zug, and Lowertz. Near the last is a mountain called the Righi, and
a smaller one, the Rossberg. The latter is composed of strata of
freestone, pudding-stone—a conglomeration of coarse sandstone, with
silicious pebbles, flints, &c.; and clay, with frequent blocks of
granite, in the lower part. On the 2d of September 1806, a large
portion of this mountain—a mass about a thousand feet in width, a
hundred feet in depth, and nearly three miles in length—slipped into
the valley below. It was not merely the summit or a projecting crag
which fell, but an entire bed of strata extending from the top to
nearly the bottom. A long continuance of heavy rains had softened the
strata of clay, which sloped downwards; and so the mass was set free,
and slipped into the valley, a chaos of stones, earth, clay, and clayey
mud. For hours before the catastrophe there had been signs of some
convulsion approaching. Early in the morning and at intervals during
the day there were noises as if the mountain were in the throes of
some great pang, so that it seemed to tremble with fear; so much so,
that the furniture shook in the houses of the villages of Arth and
St Ann. About two o’clock, a superstitious farmer, who dwelt high up
the mountain, hearing a strange kind of cracking noise, and thinking
it was the work of some demon, ran down to Arth to fetch the priest
to exorcise the evil spirit. There were now openings in the turf, and
stones were ejected in a few instances. In the hamlet of Unter Rothen,
at the foot of the mountain, a man was digging in his garden, when he
found his spade thrust back out of the soil, and the earth spurted up
like water from a fountain. As the day advanced, the cracks in the
ground became larger, portions of rock fell; springs began to flow, and
frightened birds took wing in confusion, uttering discordant screams.

About five o’clock, the vast mass of material set loose began to move.
At first the movement was slow, and there were repeated pauses. An old
man sitting at his door smoking his pipe, was told by a neighbour that
the mountain was falling. He thought there was plenty of time, and
went indoors to fill his pipe again; but his neighbour ran down the
valley, falling repeatedly by reason of the agitation of the ground,
and escaped with difficulty. When he looked back to the village, the
old man’s house had disappeared. In the space of about three minutes,
the vast mass, separated into two portions, had descended three miles,
sweeping everything before it. The smaller portion took a course
towards the foot of the Righi, destroying the hamlets of Spitzbuhl,
Ober and Unter Rothen. Its velocity was such as to carry enormous
fragments to a great height up the opposite mountain. A peasant who
survived the calamity, was engaged in cutting down a tree near his
house, when a noise like thunder arrested his attention; he felt the
ground tremble under his feet, and he was immediately thrown down by
a current of air. Retaining his presence of mind, a dreadful scene
presented itself; the tree he had been cutting down, his house, and
every familiar object, had disappeared, and an immense cloud of dust
enveloped him.

The ruin effected by the descent of the larger portion was more
terrible. It took the direction of the Lake of Lowertz. Among its first
victims were nine persons belonging to a party which had come from
Berne to climb to the top of the Righi. Besides the village of Goldau,
the adjacent villages of Bussingen and Hussloch, and three-fourths of
the village of Lowertz, were overwhelmed. But the destruction did not
stop here. The larger of the two portions filled up nearly one-fourth
of the Lake of Lowertz. The body of water thus displaced formed a wave
which swept over the little island of Schwanau in the lake, rising to
the height of seventy feet, besides doing a great deal of mischief
along the shore, especially to the village of Seewen.

By this disaster nearly five hundred persons lost their lives, and
damage was done to the amount of one hundred and twenty thousand
pounds. Of all the inhabitants, about twenty were taken alive from
the ruins. Two out of a family of seven were saved as by a miracle.
At the moment of the catastrophe the father was standing at his own
door with his wife and three children. Seeing the mass rolling towards
him, he caught up two of the children, bidding his wife follow him
with the third. Instead of doing so, however, she turned back into
the house to fetch the remaining child, Marianne, and Frances Ulrich,
the servant-maid. Frances seized the little girl by the hand, and was
leading her out, when the house, which was of timber, seemed to be torn
from its foundations, and to turn over and over like a ball, so that
she was sometimes on her head and sometimes on her feet. A storm of
dust made the day dark as night. The violence of the shock separated
her from the child, and she hung head downwards. She was squeezed and
bruised a good deal, and her face was much cut and very painful. After
some time she released her right hand, and wiped the blood from her
face. She then heard Marianne groaning, and calling ‘Frances, Frances!’
The child said that she was lying on her back among stones and bushes,
unable to rise; that her hands were at liberty, and that she could see
the daylight and the green fields. Frances had imagined that they were
buried a great depth under ground; and thought that the last day was
come.

After remaining in this state some hours, Frances heard a bell, which
she knew to be that of the village church of Steinen, calling the
survivors to prayer. The little girl was now crying bitterly from pain
and hunger; and the servant-maid tried in vain to comfort her. From
sheer exhaustion, however, the cry became weaker, and then ceased
entirely. Meanwhile, Frances herself was in a most painful position,
hanging with her head downwards, enveloped in the liquid clay, and cold
almost beyond endurance. By persevering in her efforts, she at length
got her legs free, and so obtained partial relief. A silence of some
hours followed. When the dark hours of that terrible night had passed
and morning came, she had the satisfaction of knowing that the child
was not dead, but had fallen asleep. As soon as she awoke, she began
to cry and complain. The church bell now went again for prayers; and
Frances heard also the voice of her master making lamentations over his
loss. He had succeeded in escaping and rescuing the two children he had
with him, though one was for a time partly buried in the fringe of the
landslip. Seeking for the other members of his family, he had found the
lifeless body of his wife with the child she had taken in her arms, at
a distance of more than a quarter of a mile from where his house had
stood. All of her that was visible was one of her feet. While digging
out her body, he heard the cries of little Marianne. The child was at
once disinterred from her living grave; and though one of her legs was
broken, she seemed more anxious for the release of Frances than for
her own comfort. The maid was soon extricated; but she was bruised and
wounded in a frightful manner. For a long time her recovery was very
doubtful. Even after she was out of danger, she was unable to bear
the light, and was for a lengthened period subject to convulsions and
seasons of extreme fear and terror.

A traveller who visited the district about a week after the catastrophe
has given an interesting description of his visit: ‘Picture to yourself
a rude and mingled mass of earth and stone, bristling with the
shattered remains of wooden cottages, and with thousands of heavy trees
torn up by their roots and projecting in all directions. In one part
you might see a range of peasants’ huts, which the torrent of earth
had reached with just force enough to overthrow and break in pieces,
but without bringing soil enough to cover them. In another were mills
broken in pieces by huge rocks, separated from the top of the mountain,
which were even carried high up the Righi on the opposite side. Large
pools of water were formed in different places; and many little
streams, whose usual channels had been filled up, were bursting out in
various places.’




THE WHITEBOYS OF SIXTY YEARS AGO.


There is living in our neighbourhood an old man, the son of a once
famous ‘Whiteboy.’ As such, his bringing-up must have been strangely in
keeping with the moonlighting propensities of the present day, and of
which we unfortunately hear so much. But not so. ‘Barry,’ as we shall
call him, has a horror of Land-leagueism, and will have nothing to do
with it. His experience of the Whiteboys, or Moonlighters of sixty
years ago, is interesting—at least to me; and I hope the following
account will prove so to those who are not quite _au fait_ with the
doings of these confederations in Ireland sixty years ago.

Some time since, on the death of a relative, besides other effects
willed to me, was a box containing several _curios_. Amongst them was
a genuine letter written in 1823 by Captain Rock, in those days the
Moonlight leader of the Whiteboys. Knowing from Barry that his father
had been not only an admirer of Captain Rock, but a follower of his, I
showed him the letter, hoping that in doing so I would also verify its
authenticity. It was as follows:

    ¹   PEREVIL OF THE PEAK.    ¹

    _Notis._

    Notis to Mistres H—— And all Whoe it May consarn that Whin Capton
    Rock and His Adicongs visot you next you Will take Kare to Have
    plenti of Mate and Pratees not Forgeting a Smol drop of the
    Crater.[1]

                    Sind—J. ROCK. R.T.L.

    _given at our counsil this  |
    10th day of April 1823._    |
    ----------------------------+

‘Sure, and that’s a real letter, and no mistake,’ said Barry, handing
it back to me after perusal. ‘I remember when I was a gorsoon [boy],
my father writing letters just like it, when he and the Boys would
meet of nights at our house. Many is the queer thing I heard them
plan, when they thought I was asleep in bed; and though I forgets
most of their doings now, I remembers a few; and I’ll tell them same
to you and welcome, if you likes to hear them. The Whiteboys, and the
Bloodsuckers, and the Molly M‘Guires resembles the Moonlighters of the
present day; though they were not, so to say, as bad entirely, still
they were fidgety creatures enough. ’Tis nigh on sixty years since my
father died, and I was a tidy bit of a lad then. He was a follower of
Captin Rock, the leader of what we called one kind of Whiteboys, in
those days. Captin Rock was, you know, only an imaginary name, just as
Captin Moonlight is in these times. I would not say as the Whiteboys
in my father’s time was as bad as those as followed them. _They_ said
nothing against paying the rent; and a good drop of the _crater_ would
do wonders with Captin Rock and his followers. Sure, ’twas hard in name
he was, as my father used to say, and not in nature.

‘The Bloodsuckers, who came next, were frightful creatures. They were
so called because they took money to inform. ’Twas the price of blood,
you see.

‘The famine of 1845 had a demoralising effect on the people, and many
and many the poor creature breaking stones on the roadside had a
pistol or some weapon of defence hid in the heap beside them. There
was one gentleman you would like to hear about, maybe, who met with
great troubles at the hands of the Boys. I knew him well, for many a
pocketful of apples he gave me; and he was as hard-working and honest a
creature as you’d meet with in a day’s walk. The Boys had no ill-will
against himself personally; but they thought to frighten him from
taking a farm as was “useful to them,”’ said Barry, with a knowing
wink. ‘The first thing they did was to send him a threatening letter.
Then a man as I knew full well—for many’s the time he and my poor
father laid their plans together—he was turned off to shoot him. He
stood inside the road-wall where there was an old archway half built
up—a mighty convenient place, as he afterwards said, to rest a gun on.
But for all that, he didn’t fire the shot that night, for reasons which
you’ll hear presently. The Boys were so disappointed, that two of them
went at dusk one evening to the gentleman’s own hall door and knocked.
Sure enough, just as they thought, he opened it himself for them. On
doing so, he saw the two Boys, one with a pistol, the other with a
blunderbuss.

“Come out; you are wanted,” says they to him.

“Yes,” replied he; “but wait till I get my hat.”

“Don’t mind your hat,” was the answer; “you’ll do for us without it.”

‘Just then the Missis came into the hall, and hearing the noise, off
they went.

‘Weeks afterwards, these men told the Master (as I shall call him,
seeing I never likes to mention names) that had he gone in for his hat
as he wanted to, they’d have shot him dead just where he stood, for
they would have been afraid he was going for help.

“Why didn’t you shoot me the night you were behind the old archway on
the old Moiveen road?” he asked one of them.

“The night was cold,” replied the Boy; “and the drop of the _crater_ as
the Captin sint me was that strong that it set me to sleep. I axes your
pardon now for going to shoot you at all, for you are such a ‘dacent’
[plucky] man, you might be one of the Boys yourself. And to show you I
has no ill-will agin you, if there is any little job as you wants done
before marning” (meaning murder, of course), “I’ll do it for you meself
and welcome.”

‘However, this didn’t see the poor Master at the end of his troubles;
there was more before him. A short time after, as the man was ploughing
in the field, four of the Boys came and told him to stand aside. Then
two of them held him, while the other two put a bullet through the head
of each horse, and the poor creatures died the same night. The Boys
broke the plough afterwards and warned the man away. They tied notices
on it forbidding any one to plough for the Master till he gave up the
idea of taking the farm, as Captin Rock wanted it for his own use.

‘But the Master, he was an iligant man surely. Many’s the time, gorsoon
though I was, I’d have given my two eyes to help him; but though I
was no Whiteboy, and I hated their dirty work, I was the son of one,
and you know, “There is honour among thieves.”—Well, as I was saying,
the Master was an iligant, foine man. Being a bit handy, he mended
his plough, took it in his own hands, and with his loaded gun laid
across it, did all the ploughing himself. Maybe you won’t hardly credit
me when I tell you that he did most of the work with a mule; and
sometimes, to help the poor baste, when the ground was light, he yoked
himself with her, whilst an old man who lived with the Master guided
the plough. After this, the Boys, seeing they could not frighten him,
let him alone.

‘When the Bloodsuckers had had their day, next came the Molly M‘Guires.
’Twas them as had the big blunderbuss called “Roaring Mag,” which
maybe you have heard tell of. There was an Englishman who came over
to Ireland and laid down a weir to catch our salmon; but the Molly
M‘Guires would not have any foreigners come a-fishing to our shores, so
they cut away the nets and destroyed the weir. Whenever they performed
a bould feat such as this, they made poetry of it, writing it out, and
giving a copy to the principal Molly M‘Guire Boys. ’Tis many a year ago
since four of the Boys, long since dead, wrote the piece I allude to;
and I doubt if there is any one alive but meself who could repeat it
for you; but I always had a good mimory,’ concluded Barry proudly.


MOLLY M‘GUIRE.

            WRITTEN AND COMPOSED FOR THE
                BOYS, BY FOUR OF ’EM.

    _approved of    |
    by our counsil_ |
    ----------------+

                     Sind—MOLLY M‘GUIRE.

    ’Twas of a Sunday morning,
    All by the break of day,
    When Molly M‘Guire and her army
    Came sailing down the say.
    She heard ‘Tom Spratt’s’ got down a weir
    The salmon to insnare.
    But soon she did them liberate,
    Once more to sport and play.

    When Molly M‘Guire came into the weir,
    The salmon to her did say:
    ‘If you don’t us liberate,
    We’ll surely die this day.’
    But Molly bein’ a commander bold,
    She soon did give them orders
    The salmon to liberate.

    Pat Munster the spy
    He scampered the police to bring down,
    Sayin’, there is an armed party
    Come sailin’ to this town
    With their guns and bagnots screwed and fixed,
    Besides the ‘Roaring Mag;’[2]
    For they surely will cut down the weir;
    They seem to be all mad.

    The sargint cries: ‘Come on, me boys;
    We’ll fire at them some shots.’
    But Molly M‘Guire made them soon retire,
    Her army stood so brave.
    She chases the poliss to their dens,
    Like dogs that lost their tails;
    For Molly M‘Guire will rise the hire,
    An’ cut away the weirs.

‘That’s a fine piece of poetry, isn’t it?’ asked Barry, as he concluded
this extraordinary medley, which cannot, I fear, be dignified by the
name of rhyme, much less poetry. ‘A grain of powder and shot and a
glass or two of the _crater_ would make a Molly M‘Guire your friend
for life, maybe. Sure, and many’s the curious thing I’ve known, and
many’s the plan made in my hearing by the Boys and my father; but
I would never tell on them, though I never had ought to do with
their intrigues, as I calls them. But though my poor father was a
real Whiteboy, he never had, as I knows of, the dark deeds on his
conscience that some of them Moonlighters of the present days has.
These is no times to be talking, leastways I keeps my thoughts to
meself; but as you seemed anxious-like to hear of them that went before
the Moonlighters, I am glad to oblige you. I have been able to do that
without mentioning names; and there isn’t many alive who could tell you
as well as meself of the doings in Old Oireland of sixty years ago.’


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Irish poteen whisky.

[2] The big blunderbuss taken in Clare.




CONCISE AND TO THE POINT.


Spartan brevity of speech is still sometimes amusingly illustrated. A
most worthy man, unaccustomed to public speaking, being suddenly called
upon to address a Sunday school, rose to his feet, and, after vainly
struggling for utterance, at last hoarsely muttered: ‘Dear children,
don’t ever play with powder.’—The following gallant toast was lately
given at a military dinner in Carolina: ‘The ladies—our arms their
protection—their arms our reward.’

‘Don’t eat stale Q-cumbers. They will W up,’ is the terse advice of
some wit.—Announcements on shop-signs expressed in the succinct style
of one connected with a certain restaurant in New York, should serve
as startling advertisements: ‘Lunch, 75 cents; square meal, 1 dollar;
perfect gorge, 1 dollar 25 cents.’—In the same city, a shopkeeper
is said to have stuck upon his door this laconic advertisement: ‘A
boy wanted.’ On going to his shop next morning, he beheld a smiling
little urchin in a basket, with the following pithy label: ‘Here he
is!’—A penny-a-liner would hardly find much employment on the Kansas
paper which informed the public that ‘Mr Blank of Missouri got to
owning horses that didn’t belong to him, and the next thing he knew
he couldn’t get his feet down to the ground.’ Lynched, probably.—A
Western writer, speaking of a new play just written by a gentleman of
Cincinnati, says: ‘The unities are admirably observed; the dullness
which commences with the first act, never flags for a moment until the
curtain falls.’

The characteristics of several nations have been summed up in the
following concise form: The first thing a Spaniard does on founding
a colony is to build a gallows; a Portuguese, to build a church; an
Englishman, a drinking-booth; and a Frenchman, a dancing-floor.

A cobbler visited one of the large manufactories the other day, and
for the first time in his life saw shoes made by machinery. ‘What do
you think of that?’ asked the foreman.—‘It beats awl,’ was the laconic
and significant reply.—A ‘sensible’ woman, as Dr Abernethy would have
called her, was discovered by a shy man, who made her a rather original
proposal. He bought a wedding ring, and sent it to the lady, inclosing
a sheet of notepaper with the brief question, ‘Does it fit?’ By return
of post he received for answer: ‘Beautifully.’

It is related that Makart, the great Viennese painter, is even more
taciturn than Von Moltke, the man who is silent in seven languages.
An American, who had been told that the best way to get on friendly
terms with the artist would be to play chess with him at the café to
which he resorted nightly, watched his opportunity, and, when Makart’s
opponent rose, slipped into his chair. At last his dream was about
to be realised, he was to spend an evening in Makart’s society. The
painter signed to him to play, and the game began, and went on with no
other sound than the moving of the pieces. At last the American made
the winning move, and exclaimed, ‘Mate!’ Up rose Makart in disgust and
stalked out, saying angrily to a friend who asked why he left so early:
‘Oh, I can’t stand playing with a chatterbox!’

The expressions used by some boys and girls if written as pronounced
would look like a foreign language. Specimens of boys’ conversation
like the following may be called shorthand talking: ‘Warejego
lasnight?’ ‘Hadder skate.’—‘Jerfind the ice hard’ngood?’ ‘Yes;
hard’nough.’—‘Jer goerlone? ‘No; Bill’n Joe wenterlong.’—‘Howlate
jerstay?’ ‘Pastate.’—‘Lemmeknow wenyergoin, woneher? I wanter
go’nshowyer howto skate.’—‘H—m, ficoodn’ skate better’n you I’d sell
out ’nquit.’ ‘Well, we’ll tryerace ’nseefyercan.’

The well-known answer of the Greeks to the Persian king before the
battle of Thermopylæ, was rivalled by the despatch of General Suvaroff
to the Russian Empress: ‘Hurrah! Ismail’s ours!’ The Empress returned
an answer equally brief: ‘Hurrah! Field-Marshal!’

The message from Lord Charles Beresford to his wife from the fort near
Metemmeh was pithy enough: ‘Quite well and cheerful. Privations have
been severe; thirst, hunger, battles desperate; but things look better.’

There are some quaint and pithy epistles on record. Quin, when offended
by Rich, went away in resentment and wrote: ‘I am at Bath.’ The answer
was as laconic, though not quite so civil: ‘Stay there.’

Sibbald, the editor of the _Chronicles of Scottish Poetry_, resided
in London for three or four years, during which time his friends in
Scotland were ignorant not only of his movements, but even of his
address. In the longrun, his brother, a Leith merchant, contrived to
get a letter conveyed to him, the object of which was to inquire into
his circumstances and to ask where he lived. His reply ran as follows:
‘DEAR BROTHER—I live in So-ho, and my business is so-so.—Yours, JAMES
SIBBALD.’

Concise and to the point was the curious letter sent by a farmer
to a schoolmaster as an excuse for his son’s absence from school:
‘Cepatomtogoatatrin.’ This meant, kep’ at ’ome to go a-taterin’
(gathering potatoes). A Canadian freshman once wrote home to his
father: ‘DEAR PAPA—I want a little change.’ The fond parent replied by
the next post: ‘DEAR CHARLIE—Just wait for it. Time brings change to
every one.’

Briefer than these was an epistle of Emile de Girardin to his second
wife, with whom he lived on most unfriendly terms. The house was large
enough to permit them to dwell entirely separate from one another. One
day, Madame de Girardin had an important communication to make to her
husband. Taking a small sheet of paper she wrote: ‘The Boudoir to the
Library: Would like to go to Switzerland.’—M. de Girardin, imitating
her concise style, responded: ‘The Library to the Boudoir: Go.’ That
was all.

One of the most laconic wills on record ran thus: ‘I have nothing; I
owe a great deal—the rest I give to the poor.’—A similar terse epitaph
to the following would have suited that will-maker: ‘Died of thin
shoes, January 1839.’




PARTED.


    Once more my hand will clasp your hand;
      Your loved voice I shall hear once more;
    But we shall never see the land,
      The pleasant land we knew of yore;
    Never, on any summer day,
      Hear the low music of its streams,
    Or wander down the leafy way
      That leadeth to the land of dreams.

    Still, borne upon the scented air,
      The songs of birds rise clear and sweet,
    As when I gathered roses there,
      And heaped their glories at your feet;
    And still the golden pathway lies
      At eve across the western sea,
    And lovers dream beneath those skies,
      Which shine no more for you and me.

    No more, ah, nevermore! and yet
      They seem so near, those summer days,
    When Hope was like a jewel set
      To shine adown Time’s misty ways;
    I sometimes dream that morning’s light
      Will bring them back to us once more,
    And that ’tis but one long dark night
      Since we two parted by the shore.

    We parted with soft words and low,
      And ‘Farewell till to-morrow,’ said;
    From sea and sky, the sunset’s glow
      A golden halo round you shed;
    Then as you went, I heard you sing,
      ‘Haste thee, sweet morrow:’ parting thus,
    How could we dream that life would bring
      Not any morrow there for us?

    We parted, and that last farewell
      Its shadow on our life-path cast;
    And Time’s relentless barriers fell
      Between us and our happy past;
    And now we meet when cares and tears
      Have dulled the parting and the pain,
    But never can the weary years
      Bring back our golden dreams again.

            D. J. ROBERTSON.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed and Published by W. & R. CHAMBERS, 47 Paternoster Row, LONDON,
and 339 High Street, EDINBURGH.

       *       *       *       *       *

_All Rights Reserved._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Transcriber’s note—the following changes have been made to this text.

Page 627: Luée to Lucé—“earth at Lucé”.]




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 74500 ***
